---
title: "MIDST Challenge at SaTML 2025: Membership Inference over Diffusion-models-based Synthetic Tabular data"
source: "arXiv Machine Learning"
url: "https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.19185"
published: "2026-03-20"
fetched: "2026-03-20T13:06:26.587065"
---

Computer Science > Machine Learning
[Submitted on 19 Mar 2026]
Title:MIDST Challenge at SaTML 2025: Membership Inference over Diffusion-models-based Synthetic Tabular data
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Synthetic data is often perceived as a silver-bullet solution to data anonymization and privacy-preserving data publishing. Drawn from generative models like diffusion models, synthetic data is expected to preserve the statistical properties of the original dataset while remaining resilient to privacy attacks. Recent developments of diffusion models have been effective on a wide range of data types, but their privacy resilience, particularly for tabular formats, remains largely unexplored. MIDST challenge sought a quantitative evaluation of the privacy gain of synthetic tabular data generated by diffusion models, with a specific focus on its resistance to membership inference attacks (MIAs). Given the heterogeneity and complexity of tabular data, multiple target models were explored for MIAs, including diffusion models for single tables of mixed data types and multi-relational tables with interconnected constraints. MIDST inspired the development of novel black-box and white-box MIAs tailored to these target diffusion models as a key outcome, enabling a comprehensive evaluation of their privacy efficacy. The MIDST GitHub repository is available at this https URL
Submission history
From: Masoumeh Shafieinejad [view email][v1] Thu, 19 Mar 2026 17:42:46 UTC (78 KB)
References & Citations
export BibTeX citation
Loading...
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Bibliographic Explorer (What is the Explorer?)
Connected Papers (What is Connected Papers?)
Litmaps (What is Litmaps?)
scite Smart Citations (What are Smart Citations?)
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
alphaXiv (What is alphaXiv?)
CatalyzeX Code Finder for Papers (What is CatalyzeX?)
DagsHub (What is DagsHub?)
Gotit.pub (What is GotitPub?)
Hugging Face (What is Huggingface?)
Papers with Code (What is Papers with Code?)
ScienceCast (What is ScienceCast?)
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
Influence Flower (What are Influence Flowers?)
CORE Recommender (What is CORE?)
IArxiv Recommender
(What is IArxiv?)
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.
