---
title: "Improving Spatial Allocation for Energy System Coupling with Graph Neural Networks"
source: "arXiv Machine Learning"
url: "https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.22249"
published: "2026-03-20"
fetched: "2026-03-20T14:11:25.012146"
---

Computer Science > Machine Learning
[Submitted on 24 Feb 2026 (v1), last revised 19 Mar 2026 (this version, v2)]
Title:Improving Spatial Allocation for Energy System Coupling with Graph Neural Networks
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:In energy system analysis, coupling models with mismatched spatial resolutions is a significant challenge. A common solution is assigning weights to high-resolution geographic units for aggregation, but traditional models are limited by using only a single geospatial attribute. This paper presents an innovative method employing a self-supervised Heterogeneous Graph Neural Network to address this issue. This method models high-resolution geographic units as graph nodes, integrating various geographical features to generate physically meaningful weights for each grid point. These weights enhance the conventional Voronoi-based allocation method, allowing it to go beyond simply geographic proximity by incorporating essential geographic this http URL addition, the self-supervised learning paradigm overcomes the lack of accurate ground-truth data. Experimental results demonstrate that applying weights generated by this method to cluster-based Voronoi Diagrams significantly enhances scalability, accuracy, and physical plausibility, while increasing precision compared to traditional methods.
Submission history
From: Xuanhao Mu [view email][v1] Tue, 24 Feb 2026 19:53:45 UTC (1,050 KB)
[v2] Thu, 19 Mar 2026 09:42:36 UTC (1,050 KB)
Current browse context:
cs.LG
References & Citations
export BibTeX citation
Loading...
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Bibliographic Explorer (What is the Explorer?)
Connected Papers (What is Connected Papers?)
Litmaps (What is Litmaps?)
scite Smart Citations (What are Smart Citations?)
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
alphaXiv (What is alphaXiv?)
CatalyzeX Code Finder for Papers (What is CatalyzeX?)
DagsHub (What is DagsHub?)
Gotit.pub (What is GotitPub?)
Hugging Face (What is Huggingface?)
Papers with Code (What is Papers with Code?)
ScienceCast (What is ScienceCast?)
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
Influence Flower (What are Influence Flowers?)
CORE Recommender (What is CORE?)
IArxiv Recommender
(What is IArxiv?)
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.
