---
title: "Per-Domain Generalizing Policies: On Learning Efficient and Robust Q-Value Functions (Extended Version with Technical Appendix)"
source: "arXiv Machine Learning"
url: "https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.17544"
published: "2026-03-19"
fetched: "2026-03-19T13:13:11.857941"
---

Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence
[Submitted on 18 Mar 2026]
Title:Per-Domain Generalizing Policies: On Learning Efficient and Robust Q-Value Functions (Extended Version with Technical Appendix)
View PDF HTML (experimental)Abstract:Learning per-domain generalizing policies is a key challenge in learning for planning. Standard approaches learn state-value functions represented as graph neural networks using supervised learning on optimal plans generated by a teacher planner. In this work, we advocate for learning Q-value functions instead. Such policies are drastically cheaper to evaluate for a given state, as they need to process only the current state rather than every successor. Surprisingly, vanilla supervised learning of Q-values performs poorly as it does not learn to distinguish between the actions taken and those not taken by the teacher. We address this by using regularization terms that enforce this distinction, resulting in Q-value policies that consistently outperform state-value policies across a range of 10 domains and are competitive with the planner LAMA-first.
References & Citations
export BibTeX citation
Loading...
Bibliographic and Citation Tools
Bibliographic Explorer (What is the Explorer?)
Connected Papers (What is Connected Papers?)
Litmaps (What is Litmaps?)
scite Smart Citations (What are Smart Citations?)
Code, Data and Media Associated with this Article
alphaXiv (What is alphaXiv?)
CatalyzeX Code Finder for Papers (What is CatalyzeX?)
DagsHub (What is DagsHub?)
Gotit.pub (What is GotitPub?)
Hugging Face (What is Huggingface?)
Papers with Code (What is Papers with Code?)
ScienceCast (What is ScienceCast?)
Demos
Recommenders and Search Tools
Influence Flower (What are Influence Flowers?)
CORE Recommender (What is CORE?)
arXivLabs: experimental projects with community collaborators
arXivLabs is a framework that allows collaborators to develop and share new arXiv features directly on our website.
Both individuals and organizations that work with arXivLabs have embraced and accepted our values of openness, community, excellence, and user data privacy. arXiv is committed to these values and only works with partners that adhere to them.
Have an idea for a project that will add value for arXiv's community? Learn more about arXivLabs.
